# Design and Architecture

This document discusses the design of UVM and explains the reasoning
behind various architectural choices.

## Overview

UVM is a bytecode VM with a [stack-based](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stack_machine) interpreter,
which will eventually integrate a JIT compiler as well.
It uses a Harvard architecture where the stack, code and data (the heap) are effectively 3 separate address
spaces. The following sections go in to details to explain more about the
architecture of UVM and motivate these design choices. You can find a list of supported bytecode
instructions in [vm/src/vm.rs](/vm/src/vm.rs).

Do note that the design of UVM is evolving and some architectural choices are not yet finalized. Changes
will likely be made at various points to make the design more robust and also more flexible. Notably, the
strategies to be used to support parallel computations are still completely open for discussion. Your
feedback and ideas are welcome. We just ask that criticism be friendly and constructive.

### Assembler

UVM programs are contained in `.asm` files which are parsed by the UVM [assembler](/vm/src/asm.rs).
These files can be written by hand, or generated by a compiler. 
The syntax is inspired by yasm/nasm and designed to be easy to read, and you can find some simple
examples under [vm/examples](/vm/examples). This repo also contains a toy C compiler (ncc) that emits
UVM asm files as its output.

There is a plan for UVM to eventually support a binary image format to store programs as well, but
at the moment, a textual format is easier to develop and refactor. This format is easy to target, and
the parser is likely able to parse hundreds of megabytes of input per second, so performance is
not much of a concern. The plan is to keep supporting the textual asm input format even when a binary
image format becomes available.

### The Event Loop

UVM is an event-driven system where the host VM runs an event loop that calls functions in your
program to handle various events. This is similar to the way JavaScript and nodejs work.
You can register callbacks to handle events such as keyboard or mouse input, or to be triggered
amount a certain amount of time.

One advantage of this design is that there is no need to constantly poll for events, engage
in busy waiting or
implement your own event loop, which eliminates much boilerplate code.
UVM calls you to handle an event, you handle the event, and then you
return back to UVM when you are done If there are no more events to handle, UVM goes to sleep, and
calls you for the next event. UVM has different opcodes, `ret` and `exit`, such that `ret` will
return to the external event loop without terminating execution, whereas `exit` means the program
is completely done running and wants to stop.

In the case of C programs compiled with `ncc`, the `main()` function can act as an initialization
function, register callbacks and return to the VM without exiting. To get a better idea of how this
works, you can look at the [paint example](/ncc/examples/paint.c) program.

## Design Goals

UVM is designed with the following goals in mind.

**Minimalism**: to minimize the risk of breakage, keep the VM as small as possible. UVM tries to implement as few instructions as possible,
and uses an untyped design. UVM does not implement a garbage collector or type checking. The APIs it provides are low-level and have as
little surface area as possible. Each bytecode instruction should have as little dynamic behavior and as few special cases as possible.

**Portability**: the minimalistic design of UVM makes portability easier to achieve since it is conceptually simpler than other VMs and has
fewer dependencies.

**Stability**: UVM aims to provide a foundation that remains as stable as possible over time. Ideally, existing instructions and APIs should
never change, to avoid ever breaking software that relies on UVM. The VM design is evolved slowly and carefully, and we are conservative in
choosing to implement new features.

**Self-contained apps**: programs that runs on UVM are self-contained in a single-file application image format. All application images must be
statically linked. This makes software easier to distribute and less likely to break.

**Easy to target**: UVM aims to be well-documented and easy to target. Its minimalistic philosophy and simple APIs make this easier to achieve.
The architecture is designed to be easy to understand and straightforward. We avoid architectural decisions that are quirky and surprising.

**Performance**: although untyped, UVM is designed so that its bytecode can be easily JIT-compiled using dynamic binary translation techniques
so that it can provide a good performance level that will be adequate for most applications.

**Pragmatism**: UVM is not for everyone, and that's OK. Because of its minimalistic design, UVM will not be suitable for every possible use case.
Its main target is software that end users
run, as well as some network services. Those who want to squeeze absolute peak performance out of an application or rely on the latest libraries
may be disappointed. However, we believe that trying to implement every feature and satisfy every possible use case would only make the design
more fragile and detract from our design goals.

## Architectural Choices

### No Foreign Function Interface (FFI)

UVM provides no FFI. If your program wants to communicate with the outside world, it has to be done through the
small set of minimalistic APIs ([system calls](/doc/syscalls.md)) that UVM provides. This is likely going to turn
many people away as it means that UVM can't interface with many existing libraries unless said libraries are
recompiled to target UVM.
To many developers, the lack of an FFI will probably seem ridiculous, but I view it as a necessary sacrifice.

I've spent a lot of time working with the Python and Ruby ecosystems. Both languages rely heavily on C extensions,
that is, libraries containing code written in C or C++ or Rust. In the Python world, dependencies are a minefield.
Any Python package can require a complicated build toolchain and seemingly break at any time. You may try to install
a Python package, and this package relies on another package, which relies on another package, which relies on a C
library which won't link on your machine for some obscure reason.

Another hidden cost with C extensions is that they make building an effective JIT compiler very difficult. Python
made the critical mistake of exposing underlying details of its architecture to C code. This essentially makes it
so that whenever you call a C function, it could do almost anything to your program and all bets are off.

With UVM, there is no FFI. There is a small, minimalistic set of APIs, and we hope to be able to stabilize those
APIs to eventually guarantee their stability over time. This gives you a stable foundation to build your software
on. You don't get access to just any library you want, but you get to free yourself from dependency hell so that
you can focus on the sofware you actually want to build.

### No dynamic linking

One of the key goals of UVM is to have application binaries that are fully self-contained. We want
to avoid a situation where an application needs to download dependencies from the network to install.
We also want to avoid situations where your application depends on another package that is now missing
or broken. I was surprised to find out that Linus Torvalds shares
[the opinion](https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/CAHk-=whs8QZf3YnifdLv57+FhBi5_WeNTG1B-suOES=RcUSmQg@mail.gmail.com/) that in general,
dynamic linking is not such a good idea as it adds complexity and fragility.

### UVM provides a frame buffer, but it doesn't provide GUI APIs

The APIs provided by UVM are intentionally kept simple and low-level. To produce graphics, UVM provides an API to draw a pixel buffer one frame at a time into a window. It doesn't provide a Graphical User Interface (GUI) toolkit as part of the VM itself. The reason for that is simple, it's because GUIs are complex and any GUI API that you design will inevitably have a large API surface. Another problem is that a high-level GUI will inevitably keep growing as users request more and more features that other GUI frameworks offer. If we want UVM to be small, portable, and to behave the same everywhere, then including complex APIs in the VM itself will necessarily become a liability.

UVM provides a frame buffer API. The API is dead simple, you give it an array of pixels, and it shows the frame in a window. This puts the burden on the software to implement its own GUI. This might seem awful to some, but it also means you have complete freedom and control over what your GUI looks like, and you can be guaranteed that it will look the same on any machine you try it on. Furthermore, once one person implements a GUI library for UVM, this code can be reused.

You may feel concerned about the performance of rendering GUIs in software, but there are a few simple things that UVM can do to make things faster. As it stands, UVM provides a system call to perform the `memcpy` operation. This may not seem like much, but it allows programs running on UVM to copy rows of pixels using SIMD operations running on the host machine instead of going pixel by pixel. In the future, we may provide more sophisticated blitting operations inspired by the Amiga's bit blit or using alpha blending, and/or more general APIs for SIMD computations.

### Why a 64-bit machine? Why not 32-bit or 16-bit?

UVM is a 64-bit machine in the sense that each stack slot holds 64 bits, and it provides 64-bit integer arithmetic operations.
This is a pragmatic hoice as most modern microprocessors on PCs, laptops, tablets, cellphones and supercomputers are 64-bit designs. There are still 32-bit microprocessors out there, but they are the minority by far. However, note that it should be very feasible to port UVM to a 32-bit machine.
Also note that UVM also provides 32-bit integer arithmetic operations, and that if the programs you want to run on UVM use less than 4GiB of memory, you can use 32-bit pointers, which are more compact than 64-bit pointers. This means you can effectively run 32-bit programs on UVM without the memory overhead of 64-bit pointers. You could even use 16-bit pointers if you wanted to.

### Why a stack machine and not a register machine?

Stack machines have the advantage that they're conceptually simple, easy to generate code for and easy to target. Some people will argue that register machines offer better performance, but that is mostly only true in the context of interpreters. The goal is for UVM to eventually include a JIT compiler, which will make the bytecode run at native or near-native speeds.

### Variable-length instructions

UVM uses variable-length instructions, where the shortest and most common instructions can be as short as one byte. This makes UVM bytecode more
compact, and it also simplifies decoding, as well as making UVM easier to target. On ARMv8, for instance, all instructions are 32-bytes long, but
moving a 64-bit pointer into a register can take several instructions, because the size of immediates that can be encoded is limited. With UVM,
64-bit constants can be loaded with a single instruction that is 9 bytes long, but pushing the value 0 to the stack uses an instruction that is just
one byte long. There is an argument to be made that an interpreter with fixed-length instructions may potentially be faster, but the ultimate goal
is for UVM to have a simple JIT compiler, which makes this point moot.

### Why little-endian?

This again comes down to pragmatism. The most widely used ISAs today (x86, ARM and RISC-V) are all little-endian architectures. Going with a big-endian design would mean adding extra overhead on most of these systems.

### Why not use x86 instructions or make this more similar to a virtual PC?

When designing a virtual platform to run software on, it's tempting to base its design on an existing system. For example, a virtual x86 PC running some barebones Linux kernel. The problem here is that this design can easily get very complex. You have to ask how much of this system you want to simulate. Are you going to handle I/O by simulating PCI devices and SATA hard drives? The more complex the design gets, the harder it is to port. The higher the risk that something will break, or that different implementations will have subtle differences in behavior. The goal with UVM is very much to design a VM that is conceptually simple, and has as few unspecified behaviors as possible.

There's a downside in UVM having its own unique architecture, which is that it can't automatically benefit from the wealth of tools that target x86 or other existing platforms. However, there's also a flipside to this. If UVM were a virtual x86 architecture, for example, then people would come to expect that UVM will support all x86 instructions and complain when programs they've compiled with GCC or Clang don't work as is. If UVM were a virtual Linux system, then people would complain when UVM doesn't support features they've come to expect from other Linux systems. UVM has its own design and its own identity, which avoids setting the expectation that UVM has to support whatever some other platform X supports.

### Why a Harvard architecture?

UVM uses a Harvard architecture, meaning it has separate memory spaces for code and data. The downside here is that you need special instructions to write to the code memory space. You can still write a JIT compiler that runs inside UVM, or self-modifying code, but you can't just store a value into the code space, you have to do it through a special UVM system call.

The reason for this is that this makes the implementation of an efficient JIT compiler easier. If UVM only had a single memory space, then a JIT compiler would have to assume that every store instruction can possibly overwrite existing core. That would mean each store instruction has to perform additional run-time checks so that JIT compiled code can be invalidated if necessary. By requiring that all writes to the code space use a specific system call, UVM knows when you are (over)writing code, and it also knows that regular store instructions can't possibly overwrite code.

### Why doesn't UVM implement a garbage collector?

This comes down to two main reasons. The first is a desire to keep the VM simple and minimalistic. Many programs don't need a GC, and if you need one,
you can implement one yourself. The second reason is that garbage collection is an entire field of research. UVM doesn't want to have to pick a
certain kind of GC, because inevitably, it would be more suitable for some kinds of software than others. By implementing your own GC, you can choose
whichever algorithm suits your needs. You can also guarantee that your GC implementation isn't going to change unless you make that choice.

### Will it be possible to do code patching in UVM, or to write a JIT that runs inside UVM?

Yes. This is very much a design goal of the system. In order to enable executing dynamic languages with good performance, it's going to be possible
to implement a JIT compiler that runs inside UVM. This will be done by writing UVM bytecode instructions into the UVM code memory space, which will
then in turn be translated into machine code by UVM's own JIT compiler. Writing to the code space will be done through specialized system calls,
and it will also be possible to disable these if desired for security reasons. That is, if your application is fully statically compiled and you have
no need to generate code on the fly, you can disable this feature for enhanced security.
